# Internationalization (i18n)

Core provides i18n and l10n via use of built-in technologies and practices,
along with a touch of custom logic.

In order to enable different languages on the site,
the webmaster must first install the locales desired via the underlying system.
On Debian, locale-gen is the utility to enable different languages and dialects.

Once enabled, Core will then look at the browser's `Accept-Language` request header
for the user's preferred language.
If that language is available, the site will utilize that language set,
with the configured default being the fallback.

## String and Message Formats

All i18n strings must follow a pattern in order to be detected as i18n strings
and added to the system's `*.ini` language file.

### Short Strings and Words

All short strings and words must start with `STRING_`.
These are suitable for use as titles, alt texts, button texts, and the like.
For some examples:

	STRING_EDIT       => "Edit"
	STRING_SAVE       => "Save"
	STRING_DELETE     => "Delete"
	STRING_CREATE_NEW => "Create New"

### Paragraphs and Sentences

A longer paragraph or sentence should use the `MESSAGE_` prefix to indicate that it is more than just a word or two.
Also, the name should be relatively descriptive as to what it's pertaining to.

    MESSAGE_PLEASE_SET_SECURE_PASSWORD = "Please set a secure password.";
	
    MESSAGE_REGISTER_A_NEW_ACCOUNT = "Sign up for an account!";
	
    MESSAGE_SITE_CONFIGURATION_TUTORIAL = "The system config is a low-level utility for managing any and all configuration options of your site.
                                          If there is a component-provided utility available, it is recommended to use that, as you can break your site
                                          if you improperly configure this page.
                                          <br/><br/>You've been warned, tread with caution ;)";

Essentially, anything that should be wrapped in a `<p>` or makes use of correct punctuation and capitalization, should be a `MESSAGE_`.

### Format

There are a couple strings that use the `FORMAT_` prefix.
These are used by the l10n system of Core to provide some shortcuts for code.

For example, the `{date format="SD"}` command makes use of this by providing a convenient way
for developers to request the "Short Date" format of whatever locale the end user is in.

### Site Message Strings

Core can utilize i18n strings natively in the `\Core\set_message()` function.
Here, any message that contains the correct metakey is formatted correctly; errors are red, success is green, etc.

	MESSAGE_SUCCESS_*
	MESSAGE_ERROR_*
	MESSAGE_INFO_*
	MESSAGE_WARNING_*
	MESSAGE_TUTORIAL_*

These behave identically to standard `MESSAGE_` strings, with the added benefit that they are stylized automatically.

## Variable Insertion

Variables can be inserted into strings via the `[%KEY_OR_INDEX%]` format.
Ideally the index should be the numeric index, (`[%1%]` is the first parameter, `[%2%]` is the second sent, etc).

A string can contain a given replacement string multiple times, for example:

	[en]
	MESSAGE_YOU_WON_N_COINS = "Congratulations, you have won [%1%] coins!  All you need to do is fill out this quick survey to receive your [%1%] coins right away!  Gotta catch all [%1%]!";
	MESSAGE_YOU_WON_N_S = "You have won [%1%] [%2%]!  That's right, your own pile of [%2%]!";
	
	{t 'MESSAGE_YOU_WON_N_COINS' '92'}
	{t 'MESSAGE_YOU_WON_N_S' '0.123' 'bitcoin'}

To indicate that a string has a replacement, the strings `_N_` and `_S_` should be used to hint how the sentence or message should read.

### Numeric Replacements

When the `_N_` replacement is used, Core will automatically create two clones of that key for "0" and "1" instances.
This is to provide textual differences between the three different states.

	[en]
	STRING_N_CAT = '[%1%] Cats';
	STRING_1_CAT = '[%1%] Cat';
	STRING_0_CAT = 'No cats :(';
	
	{t 'STRING_N_CAT' 32}

Core doesn't care if the number being replaced is an int, float, or string representation of a number.
If it looks like "0", the `_0_` replacement is used; if it is &gt; 1, then `_N_` is used; else, `_1_`.


## Using I18N In Core

### Smarty Replacements via `t`

There is a smarty function to assist with translation replacements, `t`.

    <p class="message-tutorial">
        {t 'MESSAGE_TUTORIAL_THIS_IS_HOW_YOU_DO_XYZ'}
    </p>
    {t 'MESSAGE_YOU_WON_N_COINS' '92'}
    {t 'MESSAGE_YOU_WON_N_S' '0.123' 'bitcoin'}
	
    <input type="button" value="{t 'STRING_SAVE'}"/>

### Smarty Replacements via `a`

The `a` function in Smarty also supports inline translation via a `t:` prefix for several attributes.
The attributes that support inline I18N are as follows:

* alt
* title
* data-confirm

Inline translation for these should be done as the following examples:

	{a href="#" alt="t:STRING_SAVE" title="t:STRING_CLICK_TO_SAVE"}
		{t 'STRING_SAVE'}
	{/a}

### Replacements in Controllers

Controllers can tap into the I18N system via a variety of mechanisms, the simplest being `t`.

	// Simple 1-parameter translation
	$title = t('STRING_PAGE_NAME_FOO');
	
	// Simple translation with 1 parameter provided
	$cats  = t('STRING_N_CAT', 32);
	
	// Complex translation via the underlying object, (allows for fine tuning and custom results)
	$stringObject = new \Core\i18n\I18NString('STRING_BLAH');
	$stringObject->setLanguage('de');
	$stringResult = $stringObject->getTranslation();

### Replacements for &lt;config&gt; directives

Config directives support automatic translation for both the key title and key description.

	// The config directive "<config key='/xyzcomp/setting/foo'/>" has the following keys:
	STRING_CONFIG_XYZCOMP_SETTING_FOO;  // Title
	MESSAGE_CONFIG_XYZCOMP_SETTING_FOO; // Description

These translations are standard strings and can be accessed as such,
and also are pulled automatically when `ConfigModel->asFormElement` is called.

### Replacements for &lt;permission&gt; directives

Permission directives support automatic translation for the permission title.

	// The perm directive "<permission key='/xyzcomp/object/action'/> has:
	STRING_PERMISSION_XYZCOMP_OBJECT_ACTION; // Title
	
### Replacements for Model columns

Models support I18N for the automatic form translation system, `addModel`.

	// The model XyzCompModel with the keys
	//     name
	//     desc
	
	STRING_MODEL_XYZCOMPMODEL_NAME; // Title for "name"
	STRING_MODEL_XYZCOMPMODEL_DESC; // Title for "desc"
	
	MESSAGE_MODEL_XYZCOMPMODEL_NAME; // Description for "name"
	MESSAGE_MODEL_XYZCOMPMODEL_DESC; // Description for "desc"

*[i18n]: Internationalization - Adding multiple languages

*[l10n]: Localization - Changing formats to locally-specific dialects